---
layout: post
title:  "Epic Fail #1: Command typo"
categories: ['Tech', 'Epic Fail', 'Learning Diary']
original_url: "https://simsrambles.wordpress.com/2017/08/29/epic-fail-1-command-typo/"
---

I'd like to think that I'm a good problem-solver. I really do. I'd like to think that when faced with complexity, I'm capable of calmly analyzing the situation in a logical manner, breaking it down, and figuring out what's important. However, incredibly trivial things like this still slip past, potentially wasting hours of time in the most unproductive way imaginable. It's never fun to realize that all your time just went down a black hole.

But you know what is fun? Reading about it. Maybe. Or at least writing about it, documenting the self-confidence kill chain with the hope that such mistakes never happen again (along with simply having something to look back to for a laugh). So for that, I decided to start a series of blog posts around these so-called "epic fails", consisting of sporadic posts on cases such as this one. Or at least hopefully sporadic. If it were any more common, I'd never get anything done.

The cause of time wastage this time? A dead-simple command typo. Here's the typo in action:

```
simshadows@norah volatility$ python2 vol.py -f ~/work/homework.vmem --profile=Win10x64_15063 --cache pcscan | tee ~/work/f_pcscan.txt
Volatility Foundation Volatility Framework 2.6
ERROR : volatility.debug : You must specify something to do (try -h)
```

Of course, I should've gotten the hint from the error that maybe I typo'd the plugin name but nope.

I believe the initial cause for me believing I had typed out the command correctly was that I was using a different installation of *Volatility* (the program I'm trying to use) perfectly fine up until that point. In particular, I was using the one installed by `pacman`. The fact that I got the error only after I switched over to one I cloned directly off Github was, to me, an indication that the Github version is somehow bugged.

Naturally, I started by googling for anyone else who had the same issue before moving on to more drastic measures. Unfortunately, the `pacman` version didn't have any of a necessary component of Volatility called a "profile" that I needed to analyze the homework memory snapshot for class. And from the last tutorial class, I overheard someone saying they used `Win10x64_15063` and found that to work, and that profile happened to be on the Github cloned copy. Clearly, this meant I had to do something with the Github copy, so I tried various things such as using different options and in different ways (like switching between short and long command options), copying files to the `pacman` installed version from the Github version (and in different ways including copying the profiles files, all of which produced weird errors), and trying the program directly on my mac (my Arch installation is a Virtualbox VM).

I also tried different Volatility plugins than this so-called "pcscan". `imageinfo` worked, though I tried the other process scanning commands such as `pslist`... except I typo'd them all again with commands such as `pclist`. At this point in this retrospective write-up, it's clear that I kept mentally substituting "ps" with "pc" for some reason.

It was only when I went back to the [Volatility command reference page](https://github.com/volatilityfoundation/volatility/wiki/Command-Reference) hours later that I realized `pcscan` was meant to be `psscan`. Imagine the shock I felt right after finding that.

Challenge assumptions, kids.
